The Joe Rogan experience. Your book, the chemical.
Age, uh, touches on a lot of subjects that, uh, I find very fascinating,
particularly pesticides. Um, I am, um,
con consistently terrified of pesticides. I'm ran into a man once, uh,
that I met on a ranch and he had an artificial thighbone.
His femur had been replaced with like a piece of metal and like a metal bone.
And he told me he got bone cancer from, um,
pesticides.
They use on a golf course that got into local water supply in a bunch of people
in that area got cancer.
And there was like some large scale a lawsuit against the,
I don't know if it was against the chemical company or the golf course or both,
but, uh, I remember thinking like, whoa, like I D okay.
I didn't even think of that. Like, of course,
if you're going to have all that green grass,
you have to do something about the weeds.
You have to do something about the bugs, that all that stuff is terrifying.
When, when I was listening to your podcast, the science history podcast,
and your friend was interviewing you, who was it? Pete Myers,
Pete Meyers was interviewing you.
And you were talking about the prevalence of these pesticides and chemicals that
we use all over the world. And he said,
I think his exact quote was,
am I wrong in saying that there's a square centimeter of this planet?
That's not somehow or another polluted by
humans and our chemicals. And you said that's accurate. That's accurate.
Yeah. It's amazing. Isn't it? That's insane. Yeah. And you think of,
you've been to Alaska and you go to Alaska, looks pristine, it's beautiful.
And you think everything is perfectly clean. But in fact,
even their most remote places in the world like Alaska are getting
atmospherically, deposited chemicals,
including pesticides that are used at lower latitude.
And so there really isn't anywhere on the earth. It's not polluted,
unfortunately.
And you were explaining the,
the way these chemicals get into the atmosphere and then get distributed all
over the world, akin to a, still like a whiskey or a moonshine.
Yeah, exactly. If you go back and you look at an old, an old,
still the way it works, you would have a heat source, like a Bunsen burner,
that's heating up a liquid and that liquid volatilizes,
some of it evaporates into a gas. And then,
and then that is connected via a glass tube to a glass ball that
has cold water on it.
And that whatever vaporizes from that heat is going to condense on that cold
surface where the cold water is.
So that's the basics of how you would make a distillery and the earth works
really in the same way.
So the equator is the part of the earth it's most directly facing.
The sun is getting the most intense solar radiation.
So you have these contaminants, like many pesticides PCBs,
a lot of other things that, that some out, some portion of them will volatize,
they'll become a gas and there'll be in the atmosphere, move in the atmosphere.
And then they'll condense out of the atmosphere when it gets colder.
So when it's winter time and it'd be a little higher and latitude and the next
summer, they'll, volatize again, they'll evaporate again,
and they'll move north again. It's called a grasshopper effect.
And so over some number of years, they moved their way north.
When they get to the north pole to the south pole,
those are hemispheric sinks for these contaminants is cold year round.
And so the amount of deposition from the atmosphere is far greater than the
amount of evaporation. And therefore the,
the poles have the highest concentrations of certain classes of these so-called
persistent, organic pollutants.
They're the ones that are relatively light that can move through the atmosphere
as a result that, and these are also fat soluble. So they get into the food web.
And as you go up each food trophic level,
you end up with higher and higher concentrations.
So the Mo the animals with the highest concentrations of these certain kinds of
persistent organic pollutants on earth are these high trophic level,
long lived animals in the Arctic, like the killer whale on the polar bear.
That'll have millions of times the background concentration of these
contaminants. Things like DDT, mercury, a lot of other chemicals,
a lot of pesticides, flame retardant, chemicals, and so on.
Wow. So polar bears. So,
and so when they, they test these animals.
So if the people in these areas eat these animals,
are they at risk of being infected by these contaminants?
Or is it not at a level where it's going to harm them?
No, it it's a, it's a really sad case of environmental injustice,
because you have subsistence peoples the indigenous peoples of the Arctic that
they're living off the Marine environment, they're reading bowhead,
whale and walrus and ICLs and polar bear,
and every single one of their meals, they're getting in the fat,
in the rendered oil, they take the blubber and they render oil,
which goes on to all of their meals, every single meal,
they're getting hundreds of parts per billion of PCBs and pesticides and
things like that. So it's just grossly unfair when you think about it,
because they never use these chemicals,
they didn't benefit economically from these chemicals.
And yet they're subject to the, some of the highest concentrations in the world.
And you were also saying that their breast milk is contaminated with it.
Yeah. Actually the way this whole problem was discovered was in the 1980s,
scientists in Canada wanted to understand breast milk contamination of
women who lived in Southern Canada,
in the industrial and agricultural areas of Canada. And so they were thinking,
where can we find a reference population of people who have no exposure to these
chemicals?
So they decided to go to Baffin island in Northeastern Canada to look at the
Intuit people that live there. And they're were surprised to find that the,
the woman on Baffin island,
their breast milk contained 10 to 20 times higher concentrations of chemicals
like DDT and PCBs and, and mercury.
Then the woman who lived in the industrial areas where these chemicals were
used. So that was the first kind of global that, that actually we're,
we're poisoning. The people are people of the Arctic we're poisoning them.
And that's how the rights of indigenous people in the Arctic to live
in a clean environment became part of the Stockholm convention on persistent,
organic pollutants.
There's representatives from these tribes who go to the negotiations every time.
Uh it's because of this problem is called global distillation because of this
fact that it's, it's like a, still the way that it works.
Now, now we know this problem exists.
Is there a solution that's on the table or a possible solution,
a theoretical solution to try to extract that.
Yeah. And actually the problem is kind of twofold.
So we've talked about one aspect of it,
which is this atmospheric transport of contaminants.
But the other aspect of it is there are also thousands of locally contaminated
sites in the Arctic.
I do a lot of work on this things like former LEAs defense sites from the cold
war. So the military built thousands of these us, military, Europe,
Russia, military,
and these sites have terrible problems with contamination.
And typically when the military pulled out of them,
they just left everything behind. We have sites we've worked in,
in Alaska where there's just fields of barrels and you don't know what's in the
barrels and they're leaking and, and you know,
you test it and you find there's, there's all kinds of nasty things,
flame retardants, and pesticides and PCBs. So I've been there a long time,
been there for decades. And unfortunately these chemicals,
many of them persist for decades. That's why they were so wonderful. You know,
PCVs were so wonderful because they were stable. They could last for decades,
but that's also why they're so bad because they're carcinogenic.
They disrupt the hormone system. They cause a lot of different problems.
So in terms of what can we do about it?
The main thing is to not be using these chemicals and to be using there's a
field called green chemistry,
which seeks to instead use safe chemicals in place of these toxic chemicals,
but in terms of cleaning up, yeah. There's also things to do to clean up.
We're involved with that in some places. And it's an important thing to do,
but we have to stop the problem even before it gets going.
When did this problem start?
Like when did human being start using large scale pesticides?
So large-scale pesticide use started in the 1880s.
And at that time they were based on metals and metal Lloyds.
So naturally occurring,
toxic metals that would kill insects or kill fungal pests, things like that.
And those were actually quite dangerous. Things like lead and arsenic, uh,
being used in, in, uh, these pesticides,
they were dangerous because they ended up on the food. So you'd buy an apple.
And if you didn't wash it while you got to a dose of lead poisoning,
that continued until about world war II and in world war II,
we made a dramatic shift from using these metal based products,
using synthetic organic compounds. So in world war II,
we saw the origin of the organic chlorine compounds and they're kind of
phosphate compounds. And,
and those really became the basis for pesticide use that.
And then there were broadcast all over the environment,
following world war II and until today.
So in the 1880s, when they were using,
they were using led and they were using arsenic, what would they,
are they combating locus? Like, what were they, what were they trying.
To kill? So the very first commercial pesticide was actually a copper
based pesticide. And it was used in France to stop the,
the mildew that was just joining the vineyards.
And once it was found that it could destroy as it was called the, uh, uh,
water mold,
once it was found that could destroy the water mold and saved the vineyards,
scientists realized you could also use it against the potato blight,
which had caused the famine in Ireland in the 1840s and other famines around the
world. So it became a very powerful tool to prevent famine. And, you know,
one thing I like to look back on is, as you can think,
why did people poison the world like this with these horrible things,
but really their motivations initially were quite positive.
They were trying to stop famine.
Ireland had just been through this devastating fam and they were trying to stop
infectious diseases that were vectored by insects,
things like malaria and yellow fever. So the motivation was good. Um,
but unfortunately the use for public health, it became,
instead of just using it for public health,
we started using it in the house and for convenience, for everything.
It is really crazy when you think that the human species has been around for
hundreds of thousands of years.
And it took till 1880 before we decided to everything up with pesticides.
That's a long time.
Yeah.
And we things up pretty fast because now we have a world that is like
you said, anywhere you go in this world,
you're going to find contaminated animals.
You go to Antarctica and you measure pesticides in penguins and their eggs,
and you'll find very high concentrations.
And are they seeing, uh, health effects of the in-unit people?
And the people that eat these animals? Is it,
is it having a detrimental effect on them?
It does. Uh, and in fact,
the cancer rates are quite high and among the people who are subsistence hunters
in the Arctic,
and that's really how I got involved with this kind of work is that people
report a very high cancer rates, also high rates of developmental disorders.
It could be due to these, these chemicals disrupting development in the womb.
And, and so there,
there are groups that bring together teams of scientists to work on this.
I was brought in as an eco toxicologist to work on some aspects of this. And,
uh, but yeah, there's quite a few health problems associated with it. And.
Are these subsistence hunters,
are they free of all the other problems that many Inuit
folks have in terms of like cigarettes and alcohol and a lot of people that have
been introduced to some of the vices of the Western world world.
Now, and it's the same kind of problems also with these communities in Alaska,
there's high tobacco use and, and a lot of problems with alcohol and.
How do they parse whether or not it's a contributing factor. You think.
It's a contributing factor and it's very hard to parse it out.
And actually this is the justification. The government often uses to say, well,
it's not the contaminants from this military side that's causing the problem.
They'll say, look, the cancer rates are no higher in this village.
That's next to the military site than they are in this village.
That's away from the military site, but, you know, uh, it's, it's, uh,
you can't actually solve the problem with epidemiology.
We're talking about tiny communities.
It might be the villages I work in typically are no more than 800 people.
Oh wow.
And so how can you do a proper study of a rare health effect when you have a
small population? So I'm sure it's contributing to the health problems.
And unfortunately,
people use the fact that there are these other issues that cause health problems
like smoking in order to justify not doing anything about the pollution.
And when you, so when you go to these villages,
is it uniform that most of them are using cigarettes and
alcohol? Is it.
So it's not uniform? So in Alaska, actually,
most of the villages are legally dry. And, uh, and so it's,
it's illegal to have alcohol. It's illegal to bring in alcohol really,
but many people do or they home.
Is this because the village has realized the problem with this.
Yeah, exactly. And so they have passed their own laws, their, you know, their,
they have their sovereign governments,
they've passed their own laws to make their villages dry,
but there are still problems of course, with alcohol and drugs,
even in tri community.
So they pass these laws, they make them dry,
but people sneak the stuff in any way. Yeah.
Yeah. Yeah. In fact, when we fly into these villages and in small airplanes,
there's typically a,
a state trooper searching through looking to see if anyone's bringing alcohol
and, um, cigarettes as well.
So is there any where you can study that has this issue
with the pollutants,
but doesn't have the issue with alcoholism and is there a village that's figured
it out and is avoided the alcohol?
So I, that's a great question. I don't know.
I I've not come across any communities that don't have multiple, you know,
multiple problems. It's difficult.
And it's the same in other parts of the world where I've done work like in
Australia with Aboriginal communities, there's,
there's a whole bunch of things going on that are harmful to health.
But the part that I'm focused on is a contribution of content.
Right.
I just was wondering if there was a place where you could examine only the
contaminants,
if somehow none of these people have figured out how to be free of.
The, it's a great question, right? It would be,
it would be a great way to study it, but I don't know.
Um, now you,
you were telling me before that you also work with some native American tribes
as well. Is this a, the same issue?
Uh, so different kinds of contaminants. I'm doing work down on the Arizona,
Mexico border.
That's mostly on pesticide use and we're working with migrant farm workers
there. And so if, if you think about the, the, um,
pesticides that were common when we were kids and, and a little bit earlier,
these organochlorine pesticides like DDT, they were pretty safe to handle.
And, uh,
the problem was that they were destroying wildlife causing species go extinct.
It's why the bald Eagle almost went extinct.
Why the Peregrine Falcon almost went extinct. It was from DDT. And, uh,
and so countries, the United States phased those chemicals out.
They were replaced by the organophosphate chemicals, pesticides.
And these were developed by Nazi scientists during world war II.
They're very similar to the Nazi nerve gas,
poisons like Tabin and Seren.
And those chemicals are incredibly toxic,
but they break down faster in the environment.
So we ended up trading doing a trade-off where, uh, they,
their organochlorine would end up as residues on food. And consumers would,
would end up with two unacceptable levels. Like if you go back into the 1960s,
the average American had 12 parts per million DDT in their body fat,
and that's a toxic level of DDT. And that was the average. So wow,
really terrible consequences for health.
So in order to prevent that we switched to organic phosphates,
but then that caused another problem,
because then we're asking the farm workers,
instead of using this relatively safe chemical to use,
do something that's quite dangerous.
A lot of people get killed in during application and the farm workers for some
of the most vulnerable people in our society.
They're typically migrants from Mexico or other parts of Latin America.
They're coming up, they're working incredibly hard.
They don't have the right protective equipment.
And then they're spraying these chemicals that are incredibly poisonous.
So I also work on that on, on, uh, health effects of pesticides,
um, in the border region,
both with migrant farm worker communities and with some of the tribes there.
Episodes of the Joe Rogan experience are now free on Spotify. That's right.
They're free from September 1st to December 1st,
they're going to be available everywhere, but after December 1st,
they will only be available on Spotify, but they will be free.
That includes the video. The video will also be there. It'll also be free.
That's all we're asking. Just go download Spotify much. Buh-bye.